---
layout: post
title: Email Blast - April 13th 2021
sub_heading: ''
date: 2021-04-13 15:00:00 +0000
tags: []
banner_image: ''
related_posts: []

---
**StopChathamNorth (SCN)**

To the Residents of Briar Chapel,

Hope all of you are well. Here’s the latest updates on wastewater in our community.

**ONSWC Submits Permit Modification Request for Odor Control Improvements**

On March 31st, ONSWC submitted a [Permit Modification request](https://edocs.deq.nc.gov/WaterResources/DocView.aspx?id=1703281&dbid=0&repo=WaterResources) to NCDEQ. The application requests a set of modifications aimed at reducing odor conditions in and around the Briar Chapel WWTP. Specifically, this application includes:

· Replace static screen with mechanical fine screen with conveyor/compactor and screening wash nozzles where washed screenings will be dropped into an “endless” plastic bag and into a dumpster.

· Current aerators and mixers which operate on the surface will be replaced with submersible diffused aeration and mixers.

· The screen, dumpster and equalization basins will be enclosed and the air will be pumped into a two-stage odor control system. The first stage is a biofilter and the 2nd stage is a carbon filter.

· The disinfection process for treating wastewater at the Briar Chapel WWTP currently involves both a UV system, chlorination and dechlorination. ONSWC wants to eliminate the dechlorination step to allow small levels of chlorine into the retention ponds to reduce odors in the ponds and into the spray irrigation system. They also want to eliminate the UV system as they feel that with chlorination it is no longer needed.

SCN supports the expedited approval of this permit modification request with the exception that we want a dual disinfection process (UV system and chlorination) in the effluent treatment process. We have sent a l[etter to NCDEQ voicing our support for this permit modification](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1DfRupbkNs4r6L4WlWSyEZmK4Frubjca7/view?usp=sharing).

**February 2021 – WWTP Continues to Operate Over Capacity**

ONSWC is required to file a monthly monitoring report reporting volume processed, volume discharged in spray irrigation and results of testing of the reclaimed water generated by the WWTP. The [February 2021 report](https://edocs.deq.nc.gov/WaterResources/DocView.aspx?id=1698653&dbid=0&repo=WaterResources) shows a number of issues:

· WWTP averaged 258,361 gpd exceeding the monthly flow (volume that is permitted to be processed) for the second month in a row.

· BOD (degree of organic pollution in water) exceeded the monthly limit

· TSS (total suspended solids) exceeded the monthly limit

· ONSWC reported that these exceedences were due to excessive rainfall and delays in sludge hauling.

On March 19th, NCDEQ posted a [revised Permit WQ0028552](https://edocs.deq.nc.gov/WaterResources/DocView.aspx?id=1684198&dbid=0&repo=WaterResources) increasing Briar Chapel’s WWTP and spray irrigation permitted capacity to 250,000 gpd.

**Status Update on Tri-Party Agreement**

Here’s the latest information we have on the status of the work outlined in the Tri-Party Agreement:

· Work has started on the forcemain bypass and should be completed in May. The pipeline bypass will run from Pump Station A (on Great Ridge Parkway by the dog park) along Great Ridge Parkway to the SD-East force main (located behind the homes on Tyner Loop). ONSWC started testing the SD East force main for use on this bypass and found several leaks which they are repairing.

· Work on the wastewater treatment plant (WWTP) expansion is underway. ONSWC is using the existing permit, requiring expansion to 500,000 gpd using extended aeration. Our understanding from Mr. McDonald is they expect construction to be completed by end of 2021.

· The permit modification request for the Odor Control system was submitted March 31st. According to Mr. McDonald, ONSWC needs expedited approval in 60 days of this permit modification to make these improvements.

· NCDEQ approved additional spray irrigation permit modifications increasing the volume of spray irrigation to 250,000gpd.

· NC DEQ is reviewing two additional permit modification requests from ONSWC that would convert some existing spray irrigation from potable to reclaimed water (e.g. Encore residential homes and Sports Courts) and allows construction of some additional spray irrigation fields (area north and south of Western pond and in common areas within Encore and behind Cliffdale homes). If approved, this would increase our spray irrigation capacity to close to 500,000 gpd.

· The Tri-Party Council met on March 9th, 2021. We are waiting for these minutes to be posted. Their next meeting is scheduled for April 13th, 2021.

**Documenting our Concerns**

**We are extremely thankful for the information shared with us by BC residents. We need to continue to document resident’s complaints/concerns, particularly odor and spray irrigation issues.** When you have a complaint, please call Integra Water’s customer service number 877-511-2911. **To make sure your complaint is documented, we ask that you also email your concern to us at** [**STOPCHATHAMNORTH@gmail.com**](mailto:STOPCHATHAMNORTH@gmail.com)**.** We will make sure your complaint is shared with all the appropriate parties (Integra Water, NCDEQ, BCCA board, First Residential, Amanda Grenier) and documented/tracked.

**Fundraising**

Total amount donated: $50,496.75 (492 families contributing)

Spent to date: $42,340.16 (Legal: $35,317.50, Engineering Expert: $6,142.00, Administrative: $880.66)

**You can donate via PayPal by using this link:**

[https://paypal.me/STOPCHATHAMNORTHNC?locale.x=en_US](https://paypal.me/STOPCHATHAMNORTHNC?locale.x=en_US "https://paypal.me/STOPCHATHAMNORTHNC?locale.x=en_US")

**If you prefer not to use PayPal:**

You can write a check to: STOPCHATHAMNORTH and mail it to: STOPCHATHAMNORTH in care of Liz Rolison, 1900 Briar Chapel Parkway, Chapel Hill, NC 27516 or simply drop the check at Liz’s house.

We are maintaining a full accounting of these funds and will return any unused funds to all homeowners who contribute on a prorated basis. Thank you again for contributing.

**StopChathamNorth**

**___________________________________________________**

**Mission Statement**

StopChathamNorth is an unincorporated non-profit association representing concerned homeowners within Briar Chapel. **StopChathamNorth does NOT support a regional wastewater treatment plant within the residential community of Briar Chapel.** We are aware that there are several new communities surrounding Briar Chapel that are planning to utilize our WWTP. We are opposed to all of these plans to expand Briar Chapel’s WWTP for uses outside of the Briar Chapel residential community. We also believe that the WWTP and ONSWC must be fully compliant with all governance and regulatory guidelines to ensure operations do not create a nuisance, unhealthy or hazardous conditions for Briar Chapel residents.

For more information: [www.stopchathamnorth.com](http://www.stopchathamnorth.com)